
> **source**: *Georgio Gregorio*, *Google Code*    
> not a fun reading - nor the best reading depending on what u know about the subject.

> Briefly, it explains the **HTTP protocol** architecture:     
> From **User-Agent** to **Origin Server**, and **intermediaries**.      
> **Cache** helps with efficiency, **stateless** and gateways help with
> scalability by re-distributing traffic among larger servers.    
> **Idempotent** means the request can be done multiple times(GET)


> __In my own words__, - and missing here - **REST** is a set of guidelines/services
> that client machines and servers **adhere to**. REST is **ideal for working with APIs** 
> over the internet using the **HTTP protocol**.   
> **REST** gained popularity with **cloud computing** - because of its scalability, the fact    
> that it is **cacheable**; thus fewer runs to server. It's also light weight, and as a    
> result and **alternative** to **SOAP Web Services**.

> **As far as API's go**, it **allows an API to interact with any client**, so    
> long as the client adheres to the same REST guidelines. In other words, so longs as,
> it runs on **HTTP protocol**, they don't even have to have any knowledge of one another.
> REST is also **platform-independent**, **language-independent**, and **security** can be     
> easily implemented. When **interacting with APIs**, for example, it **usually involves** some 
> sort of **oAuth key** and a **secret** that you **trade-in** for a **token** from the
> server API to gain access.



## REST
* Stands for __Representational State Transfer__ (Architectural Style)    
* It's an __architectural style__ (abstract). It's a set of architectural           
  constraints that you would see in a __protocol__ built in that style.
* It's the __Architecture of the Web__ as it is __today__     

### HTTP
* It's one of these protocols. Other protocols: SMTP, FTP, SSH (these are   
  all higher level protocols). UDP is the basic layer protocol, TCP/IP routing   
  protocols, RTP(Real-time transport protocol) etc.  __(wikipedia protocol_suite)__    

* __HTTP__ at its simplest is a __Request__ - __Response__ protocol.

 ```       
          ==========   ---------->           ===========
          |        |	request              |          |
          | Client |						 |    web   |
          |		   |			response	 |  Server	|	
          ==========         <------------    ===========
          	   |-------  intermediaries    -------|
          	   				  here

Client is       --> User Agent
Web Server is   --> Origin Server
Intermediaries: --> Btw you and the server you're connecting to.
					HTTP intermediaries (doesn't include devices at lower levels
					such as routers, modems and access points)
					Intermediaries are the layer part of the protocol
					Each request is independent from each other, allowing inter-
					mediaries to work in a single interaction without
				 	knowing the entire topology.
				 	Intermediaries include: proxies and Gateways
				 	Proxies are chosen by the client   
				 	Gateways are chosen by the origin server.    
Cacheable:		--> Every actor in the chain from the User Agent, proxies,   
					Gateways, Origin Server may have a cache associated with it.   

So when a new request comes in within an hour (and cache not expired), then the    
response will come from this cache and not the origin server.  

```

#### example GET request

```
	GET /news/ HTTP/1.1
	Host: example.org
	Accept-Encoding: compress, gzip
	User-Agent: Python-httplib2
```

The Resource is `broken down` into `two` pieces. Main part in `host`. Other part      
is in `GET`.

                `entire resource`      
__Resource__: http://example.org/news/

__Method__: GET (action to perform)

__GET__    - Safe, Idempotent, Cacheable
__PUT__    - Idempotent
__DELETE__ - Idempotent
__HEAD__   - Safe, Idempotent
__POST__   - has none of these characteristics

__Cache__     -> means the response can be cached by intermediaries along the way.          
__Idempotent__ -> means the request can be done multiple times.  

__Safe__      -> means there are no side-effects from performing that action.            


#### example Response 

```
	HTTP/1.1 200 Ok
	Date: Thu, 07 Aug 2016 15:06:24 GMT
	Server: Apache
	ETag: "858585858585c00d0cdkd78add5"
	Content-Tye: text/html
	Cache-Control: max-age=3600

	<!DOCTYPE HTML>
```

Also returned in that response was the representation - the Body (an HTML document)     

__HTML__ ->  is a form of hypertext; which means it has links to other resources.

* basic example of a link: <a href="http://bridgetosomewhere.com">bridge</a>

* this below is called __Code on Demand__ 
  The ability to call code into the browser, and executed in the client.

```
	<script type="text/javascript" src="utility.js"></script>
```

__Response headers__ show __Control Data__
  The one above shows how long the response can be cached.


<hr />
<br />

### Characteristics of a RESTfull Protocol:

* Resources
	- URI (uniform resource identifier)
	- Uniform Interface
		- Methods (GET, PUT, HEAD, POST, DELETE)
		- Representation (self identified by constraint content-types like       
		  hyper-text, and Code on Demand)    

* Protocol
	- Client-Server (HTTP is a client-server protocol)
	- Stateless (each request is independent from the others, allowing
				 intermediaries to work in a single interaction without
				 knowing the entire topology.
	- Cacheable  
	- Layered


- `Application`, `State` and `functionality` are directed into `resources`.    
  Those resources `are uniquely addressable`, using a universal syntax for    
  use in hypermedia links.
- `All resources` share a `uniform interface` for `transfering the state`      
   between the `client` and the `server`, consisting of a contraint set 
   of `well-defined operations`, a constraint set of `content-types`, 
   optionally supporting `Code on Demand`, and a `protocol` which is 
   `client-server`, `stateless`, `layered`, and `cacheable`.


#### URI example
(Uniform - Resource - Identifier)
A URI is a string of characters used to identify a name of a web resource

```
	|---------------  URL  --------------- |

	http://mywebsite.com/author/article.html#posts


	|---------------- URI  -----------------------|


```


### Benefits of this architecture

1. Network performance
   - **Efficiency**  (all of those `caches` help along the way and `response` 
				      may not even need to hit the `server` at all.)
				     `Control-Data` allows for data to be `gzip` before sent.    
   
   - **Scalability** `Comes from many areas`: use of `gateways` allows you to 
				     `redistribute traffic` among a large set of origin servers.
				  	  Based on method, URI, content-type or any of the other headers    
				      coming from the request.
				  	 `Cache` also helps by `reducing` the actual number of `request`    
				  	  to the origin server.
				     `Stateless` allows the request to be routed through different    
				      gateways and proxies
   
   - **User Perceived performance** - for example having javascript doing form
								   	  validation.
								   	  Also, since `GET` is `Idempotent` and `safe`,    
								   	  a `user-agent` can `prefixed results`, before     they're needed, thus increasing user-perceived performance.      



















